---
title: Clj-What?
---

While Clojure—the language—exists as a dialect of LISP, its various interpretations vary greatly. The most generic form of Clojure compiles to Java bytecode and is run on the JVM. This provides traditional Clojure code with a great deal of portability, as well as flexibility in terms of memory management.

Clojure code can also be compiled to JavaScript via the ClojureScript compiler, though. This allows clojure to be compiled on the web and with libraries such as [Reagent](https://github.com/reagent-project/reagent), can be used to build entire websites.

In practice, we will find ourselved writing code which fits into either of these two camps—or maybe both. For instance, ClojureScript implements most of the core Clojure features in JavaScript, but cannot take advantage of Java interop as traditional Clojure can. Likewise, Clojure can't take advantage of JavaScript interop as ClojureScript can. To organize our code, we usually denote pure Clojure with a `.clj` extension, and ClojureScript with a `.cljs` extension.

However, there are times that we write code which may compile to *either* of the two, i.e., our code only takes advantage of code which is included in the `clojure.core`. In this case, we may denote our file with a `.cljc` extension, which can be compiled to *either* Clojure JVM bytecode, or JavaScript via the ClojureScript compiler.

With `.cljc`, we can even take code that only has a few functions that is siloed into one or another interpretation of Clojure, and hide it behind a reader conditional:

```clojure
#?(:clj  (some clojure-specific code)
   :cljs (some clojurescript-specific code))
```

When the above is compiled, it will only read the first option for Clojure and the second option for ClojureScript. I ran into this just the other day while calculating dates, and it looked something like this:

```clojure
#?(:clj (java.util.Date.)
   :cljs (.now js/Date))
```

When I compile the `.cljc` file with the above code to the JVM, it reads the first option, and when I do so for JavaScript it reads the second.